So let's start up.
We only have 9 students
each. Students in the class and
in my list I have around 120 or.
130 students so I hope
all the other students are
doing great.
So today is our last
lecture and this
semester, but this
course is not.
Ended here as we said, uh, we
started the kind of digital
Odyssey. Uh, from a numbering
system we borrowed the name from
this brilliant movie by Stanley
Kubrick. A 2001 is Space
Odyssey, I hope. I mean, I
highly suggest you to watch this
movie. Definitely worth it so an
you understand. I mean, what is?
What is an Odyssey and what is
the history behind human
technology progress? The
technology progress by the human
species so. I mean like this.
We said that the progress we did
so far was like.
Building a, I mean a spaceship
with spacecraft by just very I
mean primitive tools or
primitive objects such as a
bone of an animal. So let's
see, for instance, we start
with the numbering system.
Uh, we said that any type of
information must be represented
by numbers, and we can convert
any number to binary numbers.
Then we device we design some I.
kind of units that can do
arithmetic calculations or
processing on top of these
binary numbers such as and or
Xor etc. And then we put them
together in order to come up
with some units that do larger
calculations or more complex
calculations such as addition.
Multiplication or subtraction
etc. And after that we figured
out we need to. Sometimes we
need to store some intermediate
results. We have to store
something formation. So we said
let's build some units at the
store. Information by the idea
of feedback or repeating the
value. So we design different
flip flops, working with the
Clock and then we put all these
flip flop together too.
Build a Larger units such as
counters, counter up, counter
down and now or I mean in the
last week. I mean previous
lecture and today we said that
let's put all these together and
build a computer system to do
any type of calculation on the
any type of information. If you
are given image so we can
convert the image to binary
numbers and then do some image
processing tasks such as.
I just detecting the edges
course such as making a
color image to black and
white image and etc.
Uh. So we start building
a computer. This is the main
problem in main design problem
in this course, but this this
Odyssey doesn't end today. I
if you wanted to continue this
Odyssey or journey, you have
to take the computer
architecture two in the next
semester. To fully, I mean
design A complex or
sophisticated computer system.
So this is the design problem we
introduced last lecture design,
a computer system, and we said
that we took a very simple
design proposed by.
John von Neumann, which is
basically says that any type of
problem which is already proved
to be solvable or approachable
by computer system, has two main
part data and algorithm for the
data we need a unit to store
the data, either input data or
the output data which is the
result of the processing. Also
we need. A memory part of a
memory to store the
instruction. Because we have
to tell the computer what to
do or what process do you have
to do on top of the input
information in order to
generate the output
information.
And, uh. We need a
processor. As the name says in
unit that process the
information by applying the
instructions. So basically the
processor is the unit that
execute the instructions and
there must be some communication
platform which we call this bus
in order to transfer the
information from memory to
processor an from processor back
to memory. We said that we have
two type of bus.
Data Bus, which is uh for the
reading or writing the
information. Also we need
another bus called address bus
which is basically.
Allows to select only one
location of the memory in order
to read or to read that
location, or to write into that
location. So basically the
processor used the other space
to select one specific location
of the memory to read or write.
So as you can see here in this
figure processor. Not only is
able to read the data, also can
read the instructions and to
execute the instructions on top
of the data.
And these are the three main
principles of the von Neumann
architecture, the data and
instruction must be both in main
memory. We designed this last
lecture. We said that the
memory we designed, it has
the random access. That's why
we can call this random
access memory or RAM.
Also, the second principle is
that the memory location or
the RAM must be addressable by
location, meaning that we have
to be able to select one row
of the memory module in order
to read from or write into
that location.
We introduce decoder attached
to address bus and the
decoder. If the decoder input
is N bit, meaning that n
wires for the address plus we
can select 2 to the power of N
different location of the
memory and the third principle
which we gonna work with that
today is that the
instructions.
I should be executed
sequentially, meaning that the
instructions in memory gonna be
fetched by the processor to be
executed. Step by Step 1 by 1
by 1 after each other.
There might be some other
architectures that does the
executed execution in
parallel or in pipeline, so
those are not based on the
fundamental architecture.
And. We did, based on this
principle, we can build the
computer, but we said that the
computer system is much more
than the computer. A computer
system is a computer that is
able to interact with the user.
Through IO devices.
Also is able to store
permanently the information.
Either the code permanently or
the input or output data.
So a computer plus the IO
devices and the permanent
decisions called can be the
system to in today's
architecture, because the
permanent storage is a type of.
I mean you can write your
information into or you can read
the information from, so the
permanent storage is become a
member of the IO devices. So in
today's architecture when you
say IO devices input output
devices, not only the monitor
which is the.
Output device or the
keyboard which is the input
device. Also the hard disk
drives or flash drives are
all called IO devices.
So then we start designing
memory units by using a decoder
and creating a matrix of memory.
So each row of the matrix is a
stack of some type of flip
flops. We use D flip flops.
And each row is 1 location of
the memory. So we created many
rows of the.
Flip flops. Each row we call
that register, so we stack these
register in order to build the
memory. Module. So today's task
is to build a processor.
One thing I have to tell you is
that building a processor is
much more sophisticated than the
building the memory store memory
unit there, and the reason is
that. Uh, uh, the goal of
building processor is to
execute instructions, so
there there might be
different instructions, so
the processor must be able
to.
Execute a lot of instructions so
the task in building process is
much more difficult than memory
because the only task in memory
unit is that just to store the
information and the information
we store in the memory. It
doesn't matter. This information
is the image audio, or it's the
instruction as long as.
We are dealing with the binary
system. All those type of
information are just a stream
of zero and one and we just
can install them by using flip
flops in memory. So there is
no specific task for memory.
Just storing the memory the
information in binary digits
but for the processor there
are lots of tasks to do, so
today's lecture gonna just
start this design process.
Or the design steps for building
a processor. But next semester,
if you take the course computer
architecture 2, the whole
semester is about building
processor. So you won't expect
me to just build a processor,
but just one session the whole
next semester in the course.
Computer Architecture two, you gonna
build just one single processor.
So that's a long another journey
for building a computer system.
So today we just wanted
to start this process.
So here is the problem from the
designer computer system. The
next step after designing the
memory is designing the
processor to do the calculation.
Large memory when we say
calculation we say that the
calculation or execution of the
instruction on data and by data.
As I said we mean.
Numbers any type of data
must be represented with
discrete units or discrete
numbers, and because of that
we are going to build a
binary system. All the
numbers must be converted to
binary digits or stream of
zero and one.
So here is the goal. We want to
build a unit.
Call processor. In order to
execute our instructions. So
basically we instruct the
processor what to do.
By writing some instructions.
This set of these instructions
the way we put the instructions
on top of each other is called
the program. So basically what
you did in the lab assignments,
write a C or C program there,
all just you're telling the
processor what to do.
So that's why we call them
program and the processor the
task of processor is to fetch is
each instruction of us which is
already stored in the memory.
To execute them.
So this is the goal of the the
main task of the processor.
Up so.
Here is the start.
Although the we want to build a
processor that executes our
instruction, but The thing is,
uh. Not all processors
are able to accomplish or
execute any type of
instructions. So based on the
design of the processor, you
might design a very simple
processor that only does
addition. And because a
because. All your instructions
in your programs are just
doing addition.
For instance, if you want to
build a specific processor for a
specific task that the only
algorithm you need is the
addition. So you won't design
A processor that does
subtraction because it's not.
There's no usage for that for
your application.
However, sometimes you need to
build a processor that does any
type of instructions such as
addition or subtraction,
division, etc. So building a
processor depends on your need
on on what application you are
going to use your process. I can
give you some example, for
instance in today's.
Technology. For instance, if you
buy a utensil from for your
kitchen, for instance, in
microwave or a fridge, or a
laundry machine, all these
devices has processors. For
instance, if you insert your I
mean card to a.
Uh. ATM machine so there is a
processor behind that ATM
machine to process the
information for. Since your user
password in the car and the
money you entered in order to
subtract the money from your
account and etc.
Or when you use a laundry
machine, for instance, if you
put your MasterCard into the I
mean laundry machine and you
select some bottom from the
laundry machine to select for
instance. I don't know the the
minutes that the laundry machine
works. There is a processor
behind that machine that does
these tasks for you. So or in
the microwave machine, when you
put the time for the microwave
in order to cook your meal.
There's a processor there that
counts the time for you. So
based on your machine or your
application you want to build,
the processor has limited
instruction to execute.
However.
The difference for the computer
system is that when you your
goal is to build a computer
system, it means that you want
to build a general purpose
system that can that is able to
do any type of applications.
So again, designing a processor
depends on your application.
Either your goal is to design A
general purpose machine or a
specific purpose machine.
Based on your goal, the
instructions that is able to
that the processor can
execute is limited.
The set of all instructions,
that is that a processor can
execute or can accomplish to
finish the instructions is
called instruction set.
If you want to see what are the
instructions, set of the
processor, the manufacture of a
processor release, a document
which is called a instruction
set reference. For instance,
if you buy a core a for instance
core i9 from Intel Company
based on the family of 64
intel 64. If you click on this
link, you can browse the
instruction set or you see
what type of instruction this
processor can actually do for
you.
And the way you can put the
instructions in the instruction
set of a processor in order to
do some algorithm or do some
processing is called assembly.
So. Basically, for instance, if
you know that there is an
instruction in the processor
that can does the addition and
you have to figure out what is
the code for that addition and
use that code for doing
addition. If you want to do
another addition after the first
addition, you have to use the
same code for that addition and
then after that if you wanted to
do subtraction, use the code for
that subtraction, which is all
these codes or all these
instructions are in the
instruction set of the
processor. If you stack all
these instructions to write
a program or to do a more
complex task, this is called
assembly and the way you are
using the instruction is
called assembly language.
So.
The processors based on the
instruction set or the number of
instructions in the instruction
set can be categorized into two
different type of processors,
either RISC. Or reduced
instruction set computers and
the assembly language for the
RISC processors. Or CISC.
Meaning that the complex
instruction set computers.
The RISC computers are those
computers that the processor
only have very small number of
instruction sets, so the
assembly language is very
limited. But the.
Thing is, there are these
instructions are highly
optimized and you can do those
instructions very fast.
For instance, if you want to
build a microwave.
The processor you need is only a
countdown processor, meaning
that you just need a sequential
logic with, for instance N bit
flip flip flop just to do
countdown from a specific time
up until zero and then you end
up with zero. So there is no
other calculation. So you
can build a processor
that is highly optimized
to do only counting down.
But your processor
is only is able to do only. I
mean counting down.
However, if you want to build a
processor that do a lot of other
instructions such as division
cap, I mean, subtraction,
addition, kind of a general
purpose processor, you your
instruction set gonna be very
large. I mean a lot of
instructions, for instance not
only integer calculation but also
of floating point calculation.
But the I mean there's a
tradeoff. You introduce more
instruction, it increase the
capability of your processor,
but at the same time you don't
have the chance to optimize the
instructions because you don't
know what type of the
calculation the user gonna ask
from your processor. So you
cannot say that I want. I will
optimize the instruction for
integer, because you might.
A user might use the
floating point calculation
from the process.
So. You have more instruction,
but all those instructions are
not highly optimized.
By highly optimized I mean
speed of the execution of
those instructions.
An immediate example is this. So
far we haven't discussed or we
haven't designed any units to do
calculation on floating point,
although in numbering system
chapter we set up how to convert
a fraction number into binary
numbers. But after that chapter
we haven't decided. I mean
discuss or design any, for
instance adders for floating
point numbers or we haven't
designed any multipliers for
floating point. Numbers, so
this is a whole different
story, and in the next
semester in the computer
architecture two, you would
design some digital units to
do calculation of Floating
Points.
If you go to market nowadays
to buy a very general pair,
I mean a normal processor,
for instance from Intel
Company or from AMD Company.
Usually these processes are
general purpose processors and
they are in the Category of CISC
processors and the number of
instruction sets are around 900-one
thousand. So basically, if there
are 1000 different instructions
that you can ask this processor
to, I mean to do.
I put this.
Elements here this character
here around this number because
there is no.
A standard convention in
counting the instructions. So if
you're interested, you can read
this blog post in this block,
but it explains what are the
difficulties in counting the
number of instructions.
But I mean, in general, uh, we
can say that for the CISC
processor, and nowadays
technology by these two
companies there are around
1000 instruction to do, for
instance integer addition,
floating point addition,
integer subtraction, floating
point subtraction, and
etc.
Any questions so far?
No questions.
So.
Basically, uh.
So far in the lab assignments,
you use the C or C++ program to
write a programming language
throughout your programs.
So what is the assembly language
and what is the? I mean these
binary streams? This story is
this. The thing is, you can
write your instruction and ask
the processor to do your.
Task to do your instructions.
Based on. The familiarity
of the human beings with the
instructions or.
Which which is I mean, based on
the relation relationship
between the human natural
language. Or you can just
write your program in the
language of logic circuits.
Basically, the binary digit 01.
So for instance there are
some. I mean the way you are
close to the natural language
processor and there are some
pros to that because when you
write your program, it's
easier for you to do the
coding or programming because
it's very closely natural
language and you can write the
program easy. However, the
processor is going gonna be
built by logic circuits that
can only do processing on the
stream of bits.
So based on this, uh.
from the natural language to
stream at 01.
The programming languages
that you are you are able
to use can be categorized
into four different groups.
Either your programming language
is of type, high level
programming language. Basically
the we can call them imperative
languages. In these languages.
The only thing you write in your
program is just say what you
want. And you don't care about
how the processor gonna execute
and gonna give you what you
need. for instance, there's a
course in computer science
called Database.
Uh, in that course you gonna
learn a new language called SQL.
SQL is a language that you can
write the programs by such
instructions such as Select
Store from a student.
So. You don't I? I assume that
you don't know the SQL
language, but if you see this
instruction in this language,
can you? Explain or can you
assume what's the purpose of
this instruction?
Any of you, I mean can can you
explain this instruction for me?
Even if you don't
know this language.
Any of you in the chat box?
Correct, yes.
Exactly, you see I mean, even if
you don't know this SQL
language, you can simply
understand what's the purpose of
this instruction. Basically, it
says that give me all the
information about the students.
A Store means only information
students is the information of
the students, so, give me or select
all the information from the
students and retrieve it and
show it to me.
So you see that the
instruction in this program
language is highly close to
human natural language.
The second category is the
middle level or declarative. All
this C, C++, Java, Python. These
are in this category, and The
thing is in these languages not
only use say what you need, but
also you have to say how are we?
The processor must accomplish in
order to give you what you need.
So basically, if your need is
just a increment number and
number by one, you have to tell
the system or the processor
first of all allocate one
location for your variable and
initialize it with one. So you
are telling the process of what
to do. So you have to
describe how and then you
tell the processor add that
value with one and then
assign it back to one.
So this is what you want.
Addition, but you tell the
processor. First of all, what
you do and then second what you
do next. So not only you say
what you need, but also you say
how to accomplish in order to
see what you need.
All the programming languages
when you heard other programming
language by default, you assume
that this is a declarative
language in the middle level.
But you might the next category
is the Assembly language
assembly language. As I said, is
the language that is proposed by
the manufacturers of the
processors. The processor when
you build when for instance the
Inter Company built a processor
is really the document in that
document. They said that we
support for instance about 1000
instructions and these are the
instructions and in the way we.
Converting instructions to
binary digits are this way.
So, and usually the assembly
languages are. These are the
instructions we call these
mnemonic. So for instance, if
you want to assign a number to
a variable in assembly language
of a processor, basically this
is the way. So move MOV or inc.
Meaning that just add by one.
So these are the instructions
in assembly language.
And the final language is the
language of binary codes or
binary digits, which is
called machine language.
So. The only language that
the processor understands is the
machine language or the digital
01. Because he said that in
order to run a program or
execute the program, the program
must be reside in memory and
memory is only able to store
information in binary numbers.
So all our instructions. So
let's back to.
previous slide.
Here all our instructions.
Any format either in high level
language, middle level language
or even in the assembly language
must become very true zero, and
ones because they are in memory.
So the only language processor
can understand is.
Machine language, which is
basically a stream of 01.
So you would ask.
in C language we write this
program what you say that the
processor is only understand 01?
So who does this translation?
For instance, I'm speaking in
SQL language. You say your
processor only understand 01. So
who does this translation?
So the translation is done by
compilers or interpreters, as
the name actually says.
By any language other than
the machine language or 01 if
you use those languages, you
have to find a compiler or
interpreter to translate your
program into binary digits.
So. If you decide to do coding
in machine language, basically
you just start putting some
zeros and ones. For instance, if
you want to create a variable A
and then put one through that,
you can start with this 00010.
It is very fast because you
don't need any compiler
interpreter, but it is very
difficult to understand if you
give this program to your
friend. Your friend cannot
understand your program.
What's this? I mean, these
streams of 011.
So because of this, you may say
that. So let's do program in a
better language is close to
human natural language. In order
to understand the program or
debug the program. Or I mean,
make it I mean understand but
human beings. But instead you
need some compilers or
interpreters to convert it back
to stream of 01.
So.
Let's see. If I do come I
mean programming in a language
that is close to him and natural
language for instance with C++.
How I can convert or I can
translate the program into
zero and ones?
Bye compilers. So I just wanted
to share my.
Eclipse.
So.
Here is the I mean very simple
program which I wrote in Eclipse
in C language. This is the most
simplest program in C language.
So basically two variables.
Of type integer.
A is equal to 1, B is equal to
two and then I allocate another
variable C in order to store the
result. A+B goes to c. So this
is only basic addition of two
integer numbers. I write this in
a C language, but I'm saying
that my computer right now is a
processor that only understands
zero and one.
So who does this translation?
This translation is the is done
by the compiler of the C
language which is translating
the this program into 0 ones in
my computer. So when you.
Click on your program.
And then you say that I'm
going to build that.
You see that let's go here.
You see that it says
invoking C compiler.
This is another program that
does the translation from a C
program to zero and ones.
And finally it creates in new
file. by this extension
executable? This is totally
another file, so this is my code
file in C.
And this is another file, so
let's open this file.
I'm going to open my.
Um?
Eclipse.
So let's see, uh?
So this is my code file.
Which I wrote in C language,
when the compiler actually
invokes by Eclipse, it
translated into.
This file. So you can
right click on the file
and then open it.
So let's bring this here.
So you see, the content of this
new file is are some characters
or something that is not. I mean
you cannot understand these
characters because The thing is
this is a binary file an all
these information are zero and
ones. You thought that? I mean
this is h, but no, this is
. Can you see my
screen? I'll call let me
zoom that.
So you might say that this is a
character or this is the
character, but this is not a
character. This is a binary
number, which in this program
in this editor it thinks that
it is H character. It just
think that. But this is truly
not h character, it is a
zero and ones so you see that
this is the zero and one's
stream stream of zero and one
of your code. This is the
translation.
The processor in my computer is
able to run this, not this
program, not the.
Let me not this program.
The processor is not able to run
this. The process is able to run
disk. And this translation is
done by compilers.
So let's back to my program.
So now that the
translation is done, I
just I put it at
breaking point here just
to show you.
What is the exact zeros and ones
for each instruction?
All correct out, nice, nice
question Noniko. I'll answer your
question so let's see for now.
Here I'll answer your question.
That's a good question.
So here is my program, an here
in the eclipse if you see this
assembly. This  assembly. I
mean Nonico. I mean, pay
attention here. Assembly
language this assembly. So this
is the reverse procedure.
Actually it converts back to
zero and ones to your
instructions so assembly is from
your program to the 0 ones. This
assembly is the reverse
procedure from zero ones back to
your instruction. So if you
click the view this assembly.
In the right side of Eclipse.
You see how this
translation happened?
So basically you see, the
program may start from here so
we don't discuss these three
commands up until here.
This is basically the first one,
meaning that what is the entry
point and how to call it main
function? Because main is a
function, but this one, the
first instruction. The first
instruction is here.
It says that the value one. This
is the binary value one.
Goes to a memory location and
this is the memory location.
And this is the assembly.
Language which is
translated. to binary
digit. This is the binary
digits.
000100 open till here. Although
we because this is a long stream
of zeros and ones. As we said in
the lab assignments, instead of
just putting a lot of zeros and
ones, we can reduce the
presentation by hexadecimal.
So in fact this is a binary
representation. But in order
to show it in a short way, we
use the hexadecimal
representation. So this is
the hands of the decimal
representation of the binary.
Translation of your first
instruction in C language.
Let's go to the second language.
The second line of the second
instruction, the second
instruction is int P2.
This translated to assembly
language like this move.
The value 2 to the memory
location 8. So if you look up
the memory location 8 you would
see the value two there.
So you can go to that location
by entering the address here.
And the translation of assembly
language to the binary 0 ones is
here. This is the binary number.
Up until C, so this is the
memory location for C, and here
is the addition, so the addition
comes these two commands.
It first does the addition and
then stores the result in
another location in the memory.
So addition the result gonna go
here and then it goes to the
memory location at this. This C
is the C in hexadecimal which is
equal to what number is C
character in hexadecimal is
equal to what number?
Anybody of you?
In hexadecimal 12. Yes this
is the 12 so you see that. I
mean, even in the eclipse it
says that it is equal to 12.
So the memory location 12 gonna
be the result.
And return, so for the return.
These are the instructions
that we we are not going to
discuss. So you see that why
this assembly you can
translate back from the
from the binary translation
back to your instruction.
So if I stop my program
and I put.
For instance, I changed my code.
Just do this.
1 + 2.
And then build it.
Translate to zero
and then debug it.
Just to see the disassembly.
So you see that my program
becomes very short. Just
two lines and this is the
translation to the assembly
language and this is the
translation from assembly
language to binary numbers.
OK, so.
Let's go back to the
slides.
So.
Here I just explained it. So
the next thing is, so all this
stuff is just before designing a
processor because we need to
know what is the
program and what's the language
of the processor.
Uh, there's another thing called
process. What is a process? When
you write a program and it is
already in the file and it is
not ready for running by the
processor, it's called a program.
Basically, a program is a
dead body.
And it is stored in some
permanent place, for instance
in hard disk or in paper, as I
showed you in just a file.
However.
If you double click on your
program or if you decide
to run your program, as long as
your program resides on memory,
it becomes a live body.
And we called this program a
process. So if the program goes
to memory and is ready to be
executed, it is called a process.
So that's the difference between
program and process.
So, and here is the life cycle
of a program. At first program
is residing in the permanent
storage. Either in C language or
in assembly language, or even
translated into binary
digits in an executable file as I
showed you in my computer. So
let's back to my computer.
Here this is the binary
translation, and it's already in
an executable file. It's not runnable right
now. However, if I double click
on that, it goes to memory and we
just finish it. So if you run
that, it goes to memory to be
ready to be processed
by the processor, and then
it's called a process.
So if a program goes to the process
state, it is always in the
language of machine or zero ands
ones. However, when it is in
the format of a program, it might
be in the C language, or it
might be in the binary language.
Here is the difference between
compilers and interpreters.
There are some languages that
use compilers for the
translation, meaning that before
running, it converts your
program into 0s and ones.
So before going to memory, it
does run for you as in the C or
C++ language. However,
interpreters, for instance, for
languages such as Python or
QBasic, the language is not
using compilers. The language
says that I'm not converting
your program into 0s and ones
permanently in a file.
Whenever you need to run
your program, I will
translate your program on the
fly before
transferring to the memory.
So at the runtime, they do the
translation between your program
and the binary language
or the machine language. So
which one is faster?
Anybody of you?
Marco says interpreters.
Anybody else?
The thing is, compilers are
faster and the reason is
you just compile your program
one time, and when you do that,
it's already in binary format. So
whenever you want to run your
program, you run by
double clicking your program.
So let's go back to my program.
So, let me open the shell first.
So if I run my program here,
it's already in binary language,
so I just run it.
Because it's already in binary
language, there is no need to
invoke the compiler again to do
the translation, it's already
translated. So when you want
to run the program, you just
simply call the binary
translation format
of your program.
However, in Python language
or in any language that uses
the interpreters,
it's slower and the reason is
they do the translation when you
run your program. So it is the
translation that is the one task
before the execution of your I
mean instructions. So the running
of these type of programs are
a little bit slower because at
the runtime, they
have to first do the translation
and then run your instructions.
So that's why the interpreters
are a little bit
slower than the compilers, but
interpreters have some benefits.
One benefit is that it
provides you some flexibility,
and there is a course in
computer science schools that is
called Programming Languages.
In that course you will
understand what's the benefit
of using interpreters or
what's the benefit of using
the compilers.
This is a specific course for that,
but here I just wanted to
I mean give you a brief
explanation.
Regardless of the type of the
translators, the only
thing important for us is that
the program must be translated
to 0s and ones, and the processor only
understands 0s and ones.
So.
How do the translators actually
do the translation? The most
simplest version is gonna be look
up table. Whenever, for
instance, your compiler
sees an addition, it just maps to
a binary stream.
For instance, if it says that A+B
equal to C, it says that the
code for addition is 000.
The first 4 digits is for A. The
1st four. Sorry, the
memory address for the A.
The second 4 digits is the memory
address for B.
And for the third memory address.
These are the binary variables.
These are the memory adresses, 0s and 1s.
This the memory address for C.
For the subtraction, different
code. For division and etc. So for
any action or for any instruction,
we have different binary codes.
This is a very simplified
version, so all the compilers
or interpreters can use this
look up table, which is
provided by the manufacture
of the processor in order to
do this translation from your
instruction to the binary
digits.
And now that we know that the
translation happens for your
program in binary, now we can
start designing the processor.
Again, this is important.
All the processors only
understand machine language,
which is the 0s and 1s.
So now we want to design a
processor and in today's lecture, I
just put an example for
designing a processor
that can do addition. So you can
think about that to do more
instructions.
So for addition, this is the
code for addition, adding the
memory location of this with this
memory location and then putting the
result in this memory location.
This is in binary.
And these are the steps that a
processor must do to do that.
So what's the first step:
fetching the first operand of
the addition from memory at
what location? At this location.
Then, we store it somewhere
inside the processor.
We store it in
a register called AX.
Then, we finish the second operand
from memory at this address,
bring it inside the processor
and put it somewhere, somewhere
else. For instance BX, another
location or another register,
so you see that the processor
has its own memory locations,
but when you mention a memory
location inside the processor,
we call them registers.
And then you use n-bit
adder. We already designed the
n-bit adder, you use the n-bit
adder inside the processor to do
the addition of the A&B inside
the processor. We put the
result somewhere else.
And then push back the results
from inside the processor
into a memory location at this
address. These are the
tasks that the processor
must do. So let's design
a processor to do this.
So these are the important
parts of the tasks.
So this is the process that
we're going to, I mean design.
So basically it has a small
range of registers, very similar
to memory locations, but a very
small amount of them
to store the information we
fetch from the memory.
And then store the information that
we want to write back to memory.
It has an internal data bus in
order to communicate within the
registers. Also, it has an internal
control bus, so the bus inside
the CPU is different from the
buses in communication with
memory. These buses are external
and these buses are internal.
There is a unit that does the
arithmetic and logical
operation. There is a control
unit that
produces the signals to
control the behavior of the
registers and arithmetic inside
the CPU processor.
Also, there is another Clock,
which is internal to the
processor for internal usage. So
this Clock is
different from the Clock
outside the processor to
communicate with the processor and
with the memory.
So the processor has its
own control system. Buses
and clocks.
So. Uh, you'll see that the
designing a CPU or designing
a processor is very similar to
designing a city, and these are
the streets. Some streets are
one way, some buses are one way,
some buses are two ways.
There are some bridges and there
are some policing. I mean you need
a control unit to control the
behavior of the different units
of the processor and etc.
And all this city is contained in the
size of this.
Again, you see the human
progress in technology.
All of this huge city is the
size of this chip.
So the first part of any
processors are registers.
What are the registers and
what's the use of the registers?
The thing is, in processors, the
registers have a specific
I mean goal or have a specific
design purpose, so they're
not just memory registers or
memory locations where you can
store any type of information
such as your instructions
or your value in the variables,
etc. The memory location, they
are ready to store any type of
information as long as they are
in binary, but the registers
inside the processor, there is a
purpose for these registers.
So you cannot store any type
of information in these
registers, so we're is gonna
explain what are the these
registers and what are the
purposes.
The first register is called
instruction pointer. Also, it's
called program counter
instruction at this register or
instruction counter. Basically
it's a register or a stack
of flip flops. A vector of flip
flops, either D flip flops or
other type of flip flops, but
the name actually gives you the
hint about the purpose of this
register. This register
should only store the address
of the next instruction that
we are gonna fetch from memory in
the next iteration.
So. This is the purpose of this
and pay attention, the address,
not the instruction itself. The
address of the instruction and
the address of the next instruction,
not the current instruction.
The current instruction is
already inside the processor and
already is executing, but
this pointer only directs to
the next instruction.
So it's sometimes called
counter and a question is
why is the instruction pointer
sometimes called counter?
Anybody of you can answer this?
Why this register is of
type counter?
All the flip flops in this
register act like a counter. We
already designed a counter, so
why is the instruction pointer
inside the processor
is of type counter?
Anybody have you?
Correct Marco, yes, because this
is a register that stores
the address of the instructions.
And, in order to be fetched from
memory, imagine these are the
high level instruction that is
translated to binary numbers,
and these are the addresses of the
instructions in memory.
We said that this on the
Von Neumann architecture, the
instructions are to be executed
sequentially. So the next is gonna
be the next address and then
next and etc. So the address as
you can see, is incremented by 1
unit at each time.
So that's why the instruction
pointer register is of
type or is designed as a counter
because the next is gonna be just
adding one unit to that address.
That's why we call that
instruction a counter or
program counter.
The next thing is you could ask, so
one thing is that we already
designed the three bit counter
which we could count from
zero to three, meaning that with a
three bit counter we can have a
program with (SHOULD BE 4 INSTRUCTIONS!)
with four instructions, sorry.
If I say that the
instruction pointer of my
processor is N units,
what is N
if I already knew the
number of wires for the
address bus?
The answer is that
the instruction pointer is gonna
have to store the memory address
because this is the address of
the instruction and the memory
address depends on the size of
the address bus.
So the address bus is gonna have
the memory address, always the
memory address of the
instructions, so the IP or the
instruction pointer register
is gonna be the same size of the
address bus. So if the address
bus is 4 bit, the IP is gonna be
4. We already said that
current computer systems has 64
address buses, so the
instruction pointer for the
processor is 64
bits.
So you could ask where is the
current instruction? The
current instruction is in
another register called
instruction register: IR or IX.
Usually when you say register,
you could just use an acronym
called X. So IX or instruction
register. The current instruction,
which is already fetched by the
processor, is inside this
register, the instruction register.
So let's have an example.
Imagine currently we are running
or we are executing this
instruction by the processor.
So this instruction is already
in the instruction register,
and the instruction pointer
Points to the next instruction.
This is the next instruction.
OK.
So now if we finished
this instruction,
I mean, we will see how we can
do that as soon as we finish
this instruction, we have to
fetch the next instruction. So
what are the steps?
The first step is the next, the
address of the next instruction
is in the IP register, so
we have to load the address bus
with the value of the IP
register, the instruction
pointer register.
So it goes to the address bus.
Then you have to tell the memory
that we are going to read the
value in this address. So, we
have to put the value zero in
the control bus. We already said
that in order to read, we have to
set the control bus to 0
to read from memory.
And then, the value of that
address is gonna load. This
is the value is gonna be loaded to
the data bus.
So the value of this address
is going to be read. This is the
value that goes to the data bus.
And then finally we have to read
the value of the data bus,
and put it into the
instruction register, so
instruction pointer.
Here, the actual instruction
loaded to the instruction
register, and this is the
instruction here. And now, the
instruction is in the processor
ready to execute.
The final task is to increment the
instruction pointer to point to
the next instruction.
This is called a fetch
instruction, so any instruction
must be fetched from memory by
these four steps.
Load the address from IP. Load
the control box for reading.
Read the instruction in the data
bus and load it to the
instruction register. And
increment the IP.
So my question is that what
is the size of the instruction
register?
This register actually
is gonna have the value of
instructions or the binary
representation or
translation of the
instruction. What is the
size of this register?
Anybody of you?
So in our example, we said that
for instance, this instruction
goes to the instruction
register. So what's the size?
The size depends on what
bus, the data bus,
address bus or control bus.
Anybody?
So let's go back to our example.
You see here that the
value of the memory. This
is the address that we're
going to read from.
Correct, yes, yes Marco, the
value of the memory location
is going to be
loaded into data bus. So it
depends on the data bus size. So
because the data bus has the
actual value of the memory,
it goes and the data is gonna
be loaded to the instruction
register. So this size of the
instruction register is the same
as the data bus.
As I said in the last
lecture, in current computers,
the size of the data bus is 64, so the size
of the register instruction
register is 64.
You could say that what did I
put more focus on
the size? Because the thing is in
today's computers, the data
bus and address bus are the same, but
they used to be
different. For instance, the
data bus used to be 32, but the
address bus used to be 20.
So in the previous
computer systems, the size of
the data and address buses
were different. That's why it's
important to know the size of
the data bus, they might be
different for any system.
There are two other
registers called Memory
Address Register
and Memory Data Register.
So what are these?
So we allocate two registers,
the instruction pointer and
instruction register just to
load the instructions from
memory to the processor.
How about other memory
locations? If the other memory
locations are not instructions
and they are the actual data, we
use these two registers to fetch
the value from memory and bring
them inside the CPU.
The memory address register
includes the memory location,
the address of the memory
location to read and write data
from it. And the memory data
register is the register that
has the actual value of that
memory location inside the
processor.
So basically the memory address
register MAR and the memory data
register MDR is working
hand to hand
very similar to the IP and IX, but
IP and IX are only for fetching
instructions. MAR and MDR are for
loading any type
of data from memory which
are not instructions.
Again, the sizes. The MAR,
because it's an address,
depends on the address bus.
MDR depends on the
data bus, so the size of the
MDR depends on the data bus.
So let's have an example
for executing an
instruction.
For this instruction.
So.
We saw how we can fetch the
instructions inside the processor
to execute. So for instance,
imagine we already fetched the
instruction at this address.
So you see that the current
instruction is this.
The IP is the next instruction,
so this is the current IP that
points to the next instruction.
The current instruction, the
actual instruction, is already
loaded to the instruction register.
So now we want to execute this
and after executing that, we
fetch the next instruction. So
let's see how we can do this,
I mean addition.
So for this specific
instruction, the first step is
bring inside the processor the
value of A.
But A has an address. This
address is already hidden inside
the translation of the
instruction. The translation of
the instruction is usually called
an op code or operation code.
So the address for the first
operand is already in the
translation of the
instruction or the output of
the instruction.
So we said that in order to
load that information from
memory, the address can go to
the memory address register.
So the address goes here.
And then this address goes to
the address bus.
And then we load the control bus
with zero, meaning that we are reading.
And then we load the memory
location. This is the address A. A
is the address. This one is the
op code of this instruction set.
It goes to MAR. MAR goes to the
address bus and this address is here
in this memory location. This is the
value. The actual value is gonna be
loaded to MDR, and it goes to
the data bus and that data bus
goes to MDR.
So this is fetching the
first operand from memory.
The second operand, the address
is in the output of the
instruction, so again the
address goes to MAR and then the
control bus is gonna be read, and
then we fetch the value from
this address from memory
location and bring it inside the
processor into MDR.
And now we have A and B
inside the processor.
But there is a problem here.
When we bring inside the
processor the B, it overwrites the
value of A.
Because we already brought A inside
into MDR, and now we when we bring B
inside the processor, it
overwrites the MDR
and overwrites the value of A.
So we have to put the value of A
before bringing the inside the
processor into somewhere. For
instance, somewhere else inside
the processor, and then bring
inside the B to the processor.
Bring the B from the memory
location inside the processor.
And then apply the addition.
Applying the addition makes it goes to a
unit that does the arithmetic, a
logic unit such as ALU that
uses the n-bit adder.
So this is the value of A, we
already put it somewhere called
AX, and this is the MDR, which
is the value of B and then
using the internal
bus, it goes to the operand one
and two of the ALU, and then we
do the addition.
Who tells the ALU to do the
addition? The control system
inside the processor.
How? Because of the op code of
the instruction, the op code of
the instruction is 001,
meaning addition so
the control bus tells the
this unit to do the addition.
If the op code is another code
for the instruction, it does
another action here.
And then the next step is
the result. Where does the
result go, the result of
the addition?
Meaning that when you do the
addition, it goes where? We did
the addition in the processor,
so we have to decide where to
store the result.
The thing is, because we are
going to write back the result
inside the memory location, we
have to transfer the result from
processor back to memory.
So one thing is that
we can put the result
back to the MDR.
So. 1 + 2 becomes three
and three goes back to MDR.
And the reason is because
MDR is for a register
which has the value that
is going to be transferred
to the memory by the MAR.
So this is a I mean fast way
to transfer new
information to the memory.
That's why we put the result
back into the MDR because the value in MDR
is is gonna be pushed back into the
memory. But at what address?
The address of the C is already
in the instruction.
Sorry I have to fix this.
The last part of the op code
for the instruction is this
address for the result. The
address goes to the MAR and
then it goes to the address bus.
The data bus is gonna be filled
with the MDR, the results. The
control bus now becomes one,
which means writing.
And then the MDR which is in
the data bus, writes down in the
memory location at this address.
So you see that for 1
instruction, it is translated
into this binary stream, and these
are the steps that the processor
must must do in order to
execute just a single addition.
And there are other
registers in the processor.
As you said, so whenever you say
somewhere else, one immediate
register in any processor is
called an accumulator, meaning that
this register is just for I
mean storing temporary results.
AX. There are other registers
that are general purpose that you can use
for any other purposes. The
processor uses it for other I mean
calculations. Usually we call
it R1 or R2 up until Ri.
And now, I just wanted
to show you that in any
computer system, you can see
the registers, all the other
registers. So.
If you go to Eclipse.
And you debug, not only can you
see the assembly language of
your program. You can go to
the window and in the window,
you can enable a register view
and the register view shows
you all the available
registers in your system.
This is the AX, RAX because
is my computer has a current I
mean state of the art CPU.
So, it is called RAX, and this is
the RIP. As you can see
here, it directs to the
instruction available in
my program.
These are the general purpose
registers, R8, R9
and etc. There are
other registers.
There is another register,
you see here the RDX.
This is the register that is used
for storing information from
memory. Any type of that.
And etc.
So even I mean in your computer
you can explore, for instance,
what are the registers, what is
the assembly and etc.
The next unit is the logic. The
unit that does the calculation,
the actual calculation. This
unit includes all the
combinational logic we designed
already. For instance, adders,
subtractors, multipliers, etc.
for doing arithmetic or logic
operations. That's why we call
this unit ALU. Any processor for
doing calculations has an ALU. Some
processors, they just do
arithmetic, so they only have AU.
Some processors only have logic
units, so LU. Some processors have
both units. ALU. As I said, it
depends on the task you want to
use from the processor.
Usually this is the
picture of the ALU.
In order to do the calculation,
some processor has additional
unit for floating point
arithmetic called FPU.
And logic units. These are the
operations that any I mean
normal logic unit
is gonna do in processors, in
normal processors.
And this is the final recap of
today's lecture. Any processor
must fetch the instruction by
the fetch cycle and
then start the execution cycle.
The execution cycle depends on
the instruction.. If it
is for instance addition, they have
five or six steps. If it is
assignment, there is just
for instance, 2 steps and
etc. So it depends on
the type of instruction, which
is evident in the op code or
the binary translation of the
instruction.
And then, uh.
We are done with building a
processor, although
as I said, in the next semester,
in the Computer Architecture 2, you
are gonna in the whole semester,
the whole purpose is designing
more units for your processors.
So today I wanted to introduce
the basics and the
whole next semester, you are gonna
fully study about the processors.
So we're running out of time,
but for your information,
there are some terminologies.
Microprocessors are just
simple processors that we
introduce and the whole next
semester, you're going to
design microprocessors. The
name says that these processors
are very small processors, so
very limited instruction set.
However, if you go to the market
today and buy a CPU or buy a
processor for your computer,
usually you call them central
processing unit or CPU.
Because they are based on the
this category, they have
about as I said, 1000 instructions,
so you can do any type of
application by these processors.
For instacne, the Xeon brand of the
Intel company or the Ryzen
brand from AMD.
But you might also hear about
graphic processing units, GPUs.
GPUs are those processors that
specialized on image processing.
And it is very, very good for
gaming. And I mean recently
we can use GPUs not
only for image processing and
video processing, but also
for some AI or artificial
intelligence tasks.
Usually the GPUs and the video
cards, for instance, can
have 2000 processors.
In a system, you might have one
or two processors in the CPU, but in a
video card for instance, ihis
company NVIDIA produces some
video cards that have 2000s
GPUs. But the GPUs, they are
not as sophisticated as CPUs, but
they are highly specialized
on image processing
and video processing.
And the most up-to-date type of
processors are by Google. It is
called a TPU. This processor is
only able to run one library,
TensorFlow. It is called TensorFlow,
just one program.
Yes, this processor is only able
to run one library, which is a
specialized for AI, artificial
intelligence. And you cannot ask
this processor to do any
general, I mean to do your
program on this processor. They
are just for a specific type of
program, but they are very fast.
That's why they build this.
They used to use central
processing units, but
because the instructions
there was not that fast,
they built a specific
processors for doing this
type of task.
And this is the start
of the next semester for
this course.
But this is the end for our
course in this semester.
And just for your information,
I'm going to be available for
next week for the office hour,
although we don't have any
class, but I'm ready to
practice on some exam questions
with you. Also, after the final
exam, I'm going to be ready for
your questions about the exam, so
even the week after the exam,
I'll be available for the office
hours for your questions.
That's it, thank you so much.
Actually we did 8 minutes
after our official time,
I mean time limit, but
yeah, that was the last lecture.
But again, this is not the last
step of our journey for building
a computer system.
Uh.
Yes, I mean on December 18, I
will post the exam, but before that,
I will prepare a
mock exam kind of for you to
practice on the how to open an
exam and upload your I mean
answers. The same with the
midterm exam but the actual
final exam is gonna be posted on
December 18, yes.
Thank you Nelson. Have a great
day too. Nico asked will you
be doing an official review
practice? Yes, as I
said, I mean in the office
hours. I mean next
week in the office hours on
Monday and Wednesday, I'm going
to practice on some questions in
the assignments or
some sample final exam
questions.
It's very similar to the
midterm, so I released the exam on,
I mean, just in the very morning
of the December 18th, for
instance at 6:00 AM or 7:00 AM on
December 18th. You are going
to have the whole 24 hours
after that to open the exam,
but once you open the
exam, you have limited
time. For instance, three or
four hours to upload your
answers to the blackboard.
Any other questions?
Thank you Justin and have a
great day and I really hope
and wish that
you have a great exam, I mean
final exam and you continue this
with the next.
course, Computer Architecture 2.
So I'm going to end this session
and I'm going to be in the
office hour, so if you have any
questions, I'm ready there for
your questions. And
have a great day!